John Turner: a great defender of Parliament - The Globe and Mail


On June 18, the Rt. Hon. John Turneris scheduled to speak at the Economic Club in Montreal, marking the50th anniversary of his first election as the Member of Parliament, inthe Montreal riding of Saint-Laurent-Saint Georges. It is a notableanniversary for Mr. Turner, and some of his original campaign team willbe on hand. But it is likely to be more than just a nostalgic reflectionon a remarkable parliamentary career. Five decades on, Mr. Turner stillhas something important to say.

The facts of Mr. Turner's life and career are well known. Herepresented ridings in three provinces, Quebec, Ontario and BritishColumbia. He held some of the most important cabinet portfolios,including Justice and Finance. He was the 17th Prime Minister of Canada.He was also Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, a vital job inour parliamentary democracy.

But June 18 will be more than just an occasion to reminisce, as Mr.Turner is expected to expand on his brief remarks at a recent PublicPolicy Forum dinner where he was scathing about the state of Canada'sParliament.

He lamented the centralization of power in the Prime Minister'sOffice, and the erosion of the importance and independence of standingcommittees 'that used to be a real element of democracy in the House ofCommons.' He condemned the Conservative's omnibus budget bill, remindingthe audience that 'the budget used to be related to taxation,' andarguing the government's strategy is to hamper debate. He also cited theinheritance of Magna Carta, the charter of liberties, that a ruler'swill is not arbitrary, and that the privileges of parliamentarians needto be protected.

'What we have in this country didn't happen by accident, democracydoesn't happen by accident,' said Mr. Turner. 'Let's fight for therestoration of the supremacy of Parliament in our democratic life.'

It was more than partisanship, it was a heart-felt defence ofCanada's parliamentary democracy by a great Canadian parliamentarian.June 18 promises to be interesting.

Editor's note: an earlier online version of this story incorrectly stated that John Turner is the only Canadian to have represented ridings in three provinces. He isn't - at least one other prime minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King, also achieved the feat. 