Exclusion of 10 candidates in Egypt's election make process less democratic - The Globe and Mail


The exclusion of 10 of 23 candidates in Egypt's upcoming elections bodes ill for the country's transition to democracy.

The reasons the Supreme Presidential Electoral Commission gave for disqualifying three front-runners are not persuasive, and appear to be motivated by politics.

Rather than trying to limit political expression, the commission should seek to keep the electoral field as open as possible, and include all candidates, even objectionable ones. Among those disqualified is the Muslim Brotherhood's Khairat el-Shater, on the grounds of his past criminal convictions for political offences linked to his opposition to deposed president Hosni Mubarak. Essentially, then, he is being disqualified for being a dissident during a dictatorship. This seems absurd.

Also banned is Omar Suleiman, Mr. Mubarak's former intelligence chief, based on the technicality that he failed to collect the minimum number of endorsements, as well as Hazem Abu Ismail, a Salafi preacher. Mr. Abu Ismail, known for his anti-Western views, is disqualified on the grounds his late mother was a dual Egyptian-U.S. citizen, a strange enough impediment, and one he denies.

Some observers believe the country's military rulers, in charge since the revolution that ousted Mr. Mubarak 14 months ago, are manipulating the commission behind the scenes. On Friday, thousands of Egyptians from across the political spectrum gathered in Cairo's Tahrir Square to protest against the electoral process. Mr. Abu Ismail's supporters have staged a sit-in outside the electoral commission's headquarters. 'It is obvious the presidential election exercise cannot be left to its own devices,' Mona el-Ghobashy, a professor of political science at Barnard College, told the New York Times. The commission has no oversight, and that gives it a dangerous amount of power.

Mr. el-Shater was considered a leading contender, and the Brotherhood's second-choice candidate, Mohamed Mursi, is not nearly as persuasive or charismatic.

The narrowing of the field will result not only in a less interesting presidential race in Egypt, but in a less democratic one. And that is regrettable.