Songstress Carolyn Mark takes Hootenanny spirit on the road - The Globe and Mail


Carolyn Mark wore a red flower in her hair, red shoes on her feet and a red dress with white polka dots whose hem swayed as she danced.

She stood on the pub's dance floor, guitar in hand. Beside her was a woman with a mandolin, a gentleman with a flute, and a tall, lean saloon pianist in a black vest.

'This is a song about a girl from a small town called Sicamous,' Ms. Mark announced. She looked over at her players. 'Not sure about the flute on this one. Have you brought another instrument?' His reply could not be heard. 'Try that!' she shouted, and as he lifted a saxophone from a case she launched into the song.

It was Sunday afternoon at Logan's Pub on Cook Street in Victoria and that can mean only one thing - Hootenanny!

The singer is hostess for the weekly open mic show at the pub, where performers chalk their name on the wall (best band name on Sunday: Slow Learners) and take their chances before a raucous audience.

'If you can make it through Hootenanny, you can make it anywhere,' Ms. Mark said. 'It's the loudest, most rude place to play ever.'

Even the hostess endures heckling, most of it good-natured.

'You guys are rude jerks,' she said of the audience. 'Don't you know who I am?'

The pub is called the Tavern of the Damned on Hootenanny afternoons. The payment for performers: one free drink, which is not such a bargain at an establishment where tequila shots can be had for $4.

Ms. Mark is taking a bit of the Hootenanny spirit with her on the road this month, as she is joined by banjoist Luther Wright and New Yorker Jack Grace ('like Cole Porter meets Gene Autry,' said The New York Times). The trio - 'three lead singers learning how to co-operate,' she said, 'all Capricorns, too' - will tour small-town British Columbia (Penticton, Fernie, Slocan, Sirdar, Nelson, Saltspring) and Alberta (Jasper, Twin Butte). The 'Owner/Operator Tour,' as they're calling it, opens Tuesday night at The Biltmore in Vancouver.

Ms. Mark will be on the road through Eastern Canada for most of the summer, only to hit the hoser highway again in September with the release of her latest album,Queen of Vancouver Island.

It includes a song about the Beacon Hill petting zoo (Save the Goats) and what she calls 'a philosophical swing tune' (The Cereal is the Prize).

Ms. Mark is a husky-voiced singer whose stage persona evokes a hard-lovin', hard-partyin' gal. She has an infectious raspy laugh that seems equal parts cough and cackle.

She was raised on a farm in Sicamous in the Interior before studying theatre at the University of Victoria. She had an acting career in mind, but found herself mostly playing corpses, a somewhat career-limiting specialty. She began singing and playing (guitar, accordion) in bands, most notably alongside Neko Case. Over the years, Ms. Mark has gained a deserved reputation as a terrific performer of songs of heartbreak, not the least of which isSecond Time about a cheating lover ('How can the second time be an accident?'), which appears on the albumLet's Just Stay Here with Toronto alt-country band NQ Arbuckle.

Her album titles tell the tale:Party Girl,The Other Women,Terrible Hostess.

Meanwhile, in preparation for a busy upcoming year, Ms. Mark purchased new tires on the weekend for her vehicle, which she calls the Van Rouge.

The Hootenanny has been a staple of the Victoria scene for nearly two decades. It began at the Old Bailey Pub (now Smith's) downtown, where one of the more memorable nights occurred during the Big Dump (aka Snowmageddon, the Whitemare) of 1996, when the city shut down following a record snowfall. Dancers from the Royal Winnipeg Ballet, whose performance was cancelled, made their way to the pub, where mayhem ensued and one of the ballerinas was last seen being carted along a snowbound street on a sled.

Or there was the time the singer Dylan Davis performed a set of Lady Gaga songs while flanked by red-wigged dancers, or the time a singer jumped on a table only to get his hat caught in the ceiling fan.

'These are the memories,' Ms. Mark said in her best newsreel-announcer voice before erupting into a fit of cackles.

Special to The Globe and Mail