The time has come for a progressive revival - The Globe and Mail


Not so bad. Quite reasonable actually. That was the general reaction last week to the Conservatives' planned reforms to the employment insurance system. And indeed such a case can be made. The measures are hardly draconian.

The same could be said for the cuts - especially at first glance, when not many details were known - in the recent federal budget. The long-range plans for Old Age Security changes? They are arguably judicious as well.

The overall impression is that, okay, while there are some Stone-Age types among our governing entities - Vic Toews, would you please step forward - there's no need to be overly exercised about what they are doing.

But that might be to miss the story. Let's go back to a blog last month written by Alex Himelfarb, the Clerk of the Privy Council under Paul Martin, Jean Chretien and, briefly, Stephen Harper. His piece was entitled, 'Going, Going, Gone: Dismantling the Progressive State.'

In it, Mr. Himelfarb cites Monte Solberg, the former Conservative cabinet minister, as lamenting how progressives called the shots in Canada for so many decades and how this has 'affected and infected everything.' That 'whole way of thinking,' Mr. Solberg went on to say, 'must be smashed.'

In the Himelfarb analysis, the smashing is ongoing. The former clerk, a progressive himself, says it's been a gradual, cumulative process. Along the way, there's been enough moderate-sounding stuff to ward off much sense of alarm. But the evidence is in the big picture.

His interpretation is hard to contest. When the word 'progressive' was dropped from the name of the old Progressive Conservative Party in 2004, few could have realized the significance of the moment.

Today's Conservatives have brought in criminal-justice and penal-system reforms considered reactionary even by some neoconservatives. On the environment Brian Mulroney's old Tories got an award for being the most green government. Today's Tories would get an award for being the least green. Their economic policies tend to favour the well-to-do and the corporations and give way to increasing levels of inequality. Their foreign policy sees a return to a warrior mentality with a buildup of the state security and military apparatus (reduced a bit recently) and a move away from multilateralism.

The progressives' battering, as Mr. Himelfarb points out, is evident as well in the weakening of the federal role in social policy. It's seen in the turning over of health-care standards to provincial jurisdiction, the aversion to national programs such as daycare, and it will likely be further abetted by a reduced tax base brought on by the reductions in corporate levies and the GST. Mr. Himelfarb uses the example of the budget to point out many other regressive turns.

So much has a back-in-time look, including the economy with its increasing dependence on extraction-based industries, a trend accelerated by Ottawa's policy of rampant resource development.

Not to be forgotten, if we're talking about going back in time, is the decline of our democratic standards as seen in the unprecedented system of information control, the attempt to muzzle those who do not share the governing view, and the like.

If society's enlightenment is enhanced by erudition, what can progressives think of a government that is sometimes proud to say it goes by gut instinct as opposed to empirical data and sophisticated research?

The list is only a partial one. Until now, the blowback against the undoing of the old Canadian way has been held in check by several factors, among them Stephen Harper's skill at not appearing radical in what he is doing, the ascendancy of Western conservatism, the weakness of the Liberal party and the power of the Harper team to frighten and intimidate critics.

But there are signs of change. The New Democrats, leading the Conservatives in a poll released this month, have reached historic highs. The issue of inequality is now ranked as the most pressing concern of Canadians. It being an issue that is a hallmark of a regressive society, it could spur a progressive revival.