If everything is for sale, what has real value? - The Globe and Mail


Is there anything on this wondrous Earth that money can't buy? An Olympic torch, perhaps? Or a vial of Ronald Reagan's blood? How about a few minutes in a tunnel with Bill Clinton?

Those are just a few things that have recently come up for sale in the great souk of modern life. The peddling of used Olympic torches caused a particularly heated debate, if I may be allowed a bad pun this early in the day. Some 8,000 gold torches (which look like Barbarella's Q-tip, if you ask me) will be carried around Britain before the start of the Olympics. A few of the bearers - people largely chosen for the good works they've done in their communities - are putting them up for sale on eBay. The sellers, some of whom are trying to raise money for charity, have been lambasted for their crassness. 'It demeans the whole thing,' said Welsh rugby star Charles Derek Williams, who carried the torch in 1948 when London last hosted the Games.

A similar outcry arose over an anonymous seller's efforts to peddle a vial of Ronald Reagan's blood on an online auction site. (At least this proved that Mr. Reagan did indeed have a heart. In the words of the MasterCard people, priceless!) The blood clearly had an unethical journey from the lab where it was tested when the former president was shot. That didn't seem to bother bidders, who drove the price up to more than $30,000 before the auction was halted. The seller has now agreed to donate the sample to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation instead, but first offered an ideological excuse for being a vampire Willy Loman: 'I was a real fan of Reaganomics and felt that President Reagan himself would rather see me sell it rather than donating it.'

Why the fuss, though? You can sell your plasma legally in the United States, and no one seems to mind if it comes from the veins of an unemployed dude who needs the cash, rather than a former president. But should blood be for sale? Should the market govern every human interaction, as it increasingly does?

That was the question that greeted the nearly 2,000 people who packed St. Paul's Cathedral this week to hear Harvard political philosopher Michael Sandel talk about his new book,What Money Can't Buy (spoiler alert: not very much). The crowd consisted largely of a type I think of as the anxious middle, people who are fundamentally worried about the commercialization of life but aren't sure what to do about it. The lecture was free, which is a good thing: Normally, you have to put $24 in the Almighty's coffers to get into St. Paul's.

'We have drifted from having a market economy to being a market society,' Prof. Sandel said, where monetary exchange has crept into even the most obscure corners. Want a ticket to a congressional hearing? Pay someone to stand in line, as lobbyists do. Trying to write a toast for a loved one's wedding? Hire an online service to do it for you. Worried that the students in your class aren't reading? Pay them for every book they finish. Need to eat? Sell your blood.

The problem isn't so much the transactions themselves, he said, as the fact that we accept them as given; economic incentives are seen as not just the best, but the only motivator for social change. There's no debate about whether goods and relationships are corrupted by attaching commercial value to them. Economics claims to have no truck with morality.

Worse, though, is what he calls the 'Skyboxification of everyday life.' When the wealthy spend money to make life more convenient, whether it's buying the 'fast track' pass at an amusement park or happily paying the fine to drive in the car-pool lane, they literally separate themselves from people who can't afford such luxuries (or frown on them as unfair). When people from different backgrounds never share experiences or meet in public spaces, what happens to common goals?

This brings us to Bill Clinton's ill-fated fundraiser for his foundation this week in London, a party held in the tunnels under Waterloo station. While commuters streamed onto their trains up above, the great and good fumed down below, unable to get into the party to hear the former president talk about climate change.

The Daily Telegraph reported that some people had paid the equivalent of $1,500 to meet Mr. Clinton, and guests were angered that he made a fleeting appearance, and that the venue was smelly and dank. ('Bill Clinton's stinky, sweaty party' isn't the draw it once was.) But what did the donors think they were doing with their money? Buying a minute of stardust, or helping alleviate climate change? Even if they didn't get to shake his hand, surely their money was well spent? They obviously didn't view the transaction the same way. When the whole world's a market, there are unhappy customers everywhere.