Excellence is not homogeneity - The Globe and Mail


The federal government has a laudable goal in insisting on merit and quality in the selection of judges, but its nearly all-white appointment pattern suggests it is putting something other than merit first. Or is it saying merit is found almost exclusively among white lawyers?

'Our government is guided by the principles of merit and legal excellence in the selection and appointment of judges,' Julie Di Mambro, a Justice Department spokesperson, says.

Those are fine guidelines. But why should Canadians believe the government adheres to them? Of the past 100 appointments to the superior courts of provinces, federal and tax courts, 98 have been white. A process that truly stressed merit and excellence would have produced a more diverse group, unless merit and excellence in the Canadian law profession are the preserve of one skin colour.

It is clear from business, literature, medicine, science, the academy and other spheres that merit and excellence are found everywhere. Is law different, for some reason? Of course not. Have law schools been discriminating against aboriginals, blacks, Asians? No. Leading schools such as the University of Toronto Law School have been doing their utmost to reach out to talented young people of all hues.

And why, if the system is guided by 'the principles of merit and legal excellence,' does the government ask only that candidates meet the low bar of being 'recommended' by one of 17 judicial nominating committees (whose members are appointed by the federal government)? It was the Conservative government that removed another designation - 'highly recommended.' It used to be that, rather than being faced with a parking lot full of 'recommended' candidates, the government was told who was 'recommended' and who was 'highly recommended.' That meant more opportunity for objective advice on merit and legal excellence. It meant less opportunity for political patronage - or at least, a bit more embarrassment, if the recommended list produced more appointments than the highly recommended one.

Many reasons could be offered for having a diverse bench, but the best one is that a truly fair and open competition pushes the bar higher on our definition of merit and excellence. To judge from the Conservative appointment record, the bar is low, and the competition is not fair or open.