Councillor on thin ice over proposed road hockey rules - The Globe and Mail


Poor Josh Matlow. A rookie North Toronto councillor not necessarily averse to seeing his name in the paper, he saw a chance to burnish his record and strike a blow for freedom by fighting the 'archaic and inane' bylaw banning the playing of ball hockey in Toronto streets. Now he finds himself struggling to defend suggested new street-hockey rules that would be more bureaucratic than the ban itself.

When Mr. Matlow first called for doing away with the prohibition, it seemed to make good sense. What could be sillier than outlawing a version of Canada's sport on the streets of its biggest city? The effect of the bylaw, he argued, was to make kids feel 'criminalized' every time they picked up a stick and ball.

But city staff, less concerned with how things feel than how they actually work, raised some equally sensible doubts. The bylaw, they note, technically bans not just ball hockey but all sports from being played in the roadway. One intent is to protect the city from being sued if someone gets hurt.

In the Toronto area alone, Oakville, Pickering, Mississauga, Milton and Burlington all have similar rules. Only Kingston has excepted ball hockey from its ban on playing sports in the street, says a Toronto staff report, and a similar exception might not protect Toronto from liability.

In any case, the Toronto ban is rarely enforced. Kids happily shoot, score, check and holler 'car' despite those city signs saying 'Ball and Hockey Playing Prohibited.' The last time the issue came up, a year ago, the city's public works committee decided it was wiser just to leave things as they are.

But Mr. Matlow, refusing to say die, managed to persuade city council to look at allowing residents to apply for an exemption to the ban. According to him, one option, soon to be proposed by city staff, would require applicants to get the approval of 80 per cent of the households on the street to receive permission to play. It would be granted only on roadways with sight lines clear enough to allow vehicles to stop in time, a speed limit of 40 kilometres an hour or less, fewer than 1,000 vehicles a day driving through and an average time between vehicles of at least one minute.

In short, residents would have to troop down to City Hall to get approval for something they now do spontaneously. Imagine officials coming to your street to conduct a traffic study just to see whether it is okay to play a hockey game.

Mr. Matlow argues with a straight face that parents applying for an exemption on their street could use the exercise as 'a kind of civics lesson' for their kids. 'Frankly, if they are on a cul de sac, if there are very few cars there, the sight lines are appropriate and the whole street agrees, it should be no big deal - and then they're free.'

Unfortunately, it is just as easy to imagine street-hockey applications turning into the kind of neighbour-versus-neighbour tussles you now see over fences or front-yard parking pads. Why make such a fuss? As more than one city councillor has suggested, this is a solution in search of a problem.

'I think it works fine the way it is to be quite honest,' says Kristyn Wong-Tam, a left-leaning councillor who is no foe of sensible regulation. 'Many times things just serendipitously work themselves out.'

John Parker, a North Toronto conservative, said something similar. 'Look, I love my colleague Councillor Matlow to bits and I would never suggest that anything he brings forward is for the benefit of gaining public profile and the odd cheap headline,' said Mr. Parker, who has a wry sense of humour, 'but I think the city has done just fine at accommodating road hockey on our streets without the benefit of a study by city staff and committees and new bylaws and procedures. Somehow we all manage to cope in this country.'

We do. Notwithstanding the posted ban, road-hockey games go on every day in the streets of Toronto without permits or studies. The last thing we want to do is invite city hall to play.