In wake of bag debacle, Rob Ford needs to find a way to lead again - The Globe and Mail


For months, there have been warnings of a leadership vacuum in Canada's largest city. This week, the severity of that problem and its potential consequences were brought into sharp focus by, of all things, a decision to ban plastic shopping bags.

The cause for concern has less to do with the policy itself - though it does seem a heavy-handed infringement on the ability of businesses and consumers to make their own decisions - than the on-the-fly manner in which it was adopted by Toronto's council. At the start of Wednesday, councillors were debating whether to support Mayor Rob Ford's push to eliminate a five-cent surcharge on plastic bags. Hours later, they emerged having voted to get rid of not only the fee but the bags themselves - the latter without any serious consideration of environmental benefits, economic impact or even how the ban would be enforced.

Mr. Ford is doing his best to frame this turn of events as left-wing councillors run amok, but he must share the blame. Elected with a strong right-of-centre mandate and a seemingly compliant council, he has squandered his political capital through combativeness combined with a poor grasp of his responsibilities. Now, even erstwhile allies seem bent on embarrassing him - as demonstrated by the fact that it was David Shiner, a conservative member of the mayor's executive committee, who proposed the plastic-bag ban.

With limited executive authority, a Toronto mayor's power is mostly derived from his or her ability to unite councillors in common cause, or at least broker compromise. To date, Mr. Ford has shown little interest in either, preferring to publicly portray himself as a victim of left-wing conspiracies.

There may be some public sympathy for that argument; already, there is speculation that this week's bag ban could aid his re-election in 2014. But Toronto needs a strong hand before then; otherwise, budgetary and other important decisions will descend into the sort of chaos witnessed this week. Rather than embracing his current role as an opposition politician, Mr. Ford needs to find a way to lead again.