We like a chuckle with our parliamentary cut and thrust - The Globe and Mail


A guy arrives at the Pearly Gates. He's greeted by the Almighty One.

'What are all those clocks behind you?' the fellow asks.

'Well, the second hand keeps track of all your lies,' the Good Lord explains. 'Every time you crank one out, it moves.'

'Interesting,' says the visitor. 'What about Bill Clinton. Where's his clock?'

'In the room next door. Jesus is using it as a ceiling fan.'

'What about Nixon?' the fellow asks. 'Where's his?'

The Good Lord points over to a runway. 'On my airplane. It's the propeller.'

I was reminded of the story the other day as someone was lamenting the lack of humour in the nation's capital. A little wit, as he was saying, can go a long way. Makes politicians more likeable. Shows they don't take themselves too seriously. Defuses tension and controversy.

On the hustings once, Theodore Roosevelt was being harangued by a heckler who boasted of being a Democrat. 'May I ask the gentleman why he is a Democrat?' Teddy asked.

'My grandfather was a Democrat,' came the response. 'My father was a Democrat. And I'm a Democrat!'

Fair enough, replied the president. 'Now let's say your grandfather had been a jackass. And your father was a jackass. What, then, would you be?'

For leaders like Ronald Reagan, who went a long way given his mental equipment, a sunny sense of humour was central to success. Never known as a hard-working president, the Gipper was given to dozing off during important meetings. At one point, as legend has it, he left a directive to his staff. 'In case of a national emergency,' it said, 'I want to be awakened - even if I'm in a cabinet meeting.'

'They say hard work never killed anybody,' Mr. Reagan pointed out on another occasion. 'But why take the chance?'

His good friend Brian Mulroney was frequently criticized for his lavish tastes. He reportedly had as many high-priced pairs of shoes as Imelda Marcos. 'Guccigate,' the media called it. Mr. Mulroney responded with self-deprecating humour. He told a Press Gallery dinner of the day his son Nicholas got lost in his shoe closet. 'And it took us an hour to find him.'

The classic example of wit being deployed to defuse tension came from John F. Kennedy, whose family was accused of using shady tactics to win votes. 'I've just received the following wire from my generous dad,' JFK told an audience. 'Dear Jack. Don't buy a single vote more than is necessary. I'll be damned if I'm going to pay for a landslide.'

In Ottawa, we have a Prime Minister who has a cutting and dry wit in private but seldom shows a humorous side in public. Bob Rae's sardonic way with words gets little notice, and while Tom Mulcair enjoys a good joke behind the scenes, he is hardly one to display a lightness of spirit in the public eye. To soften his image, some would like him to remove the beard. It might also help if he got rid of that Che Guevara shirt he wore while touring the oil sands last week.

The Commons, it should be said, does have some sharp and funny tongues. The Conservatives benefit from the droll and jolly ways of their court jester John Baird. He can take the starch out of anything.

For the New Democrats, showing a fun side as opposed to being seen as perpetual whiners is especially important. They've got Charlie Angus, who sprinkles his colourful invective with barbs aplenty, the quick-witted Nathan Cullen, and for dry sarcasm, few can outclass Megan Leslie.

Politics is a tough game. The word itself, as some wag explained, might tell you that. It derives from the word poly, meaning many, and ticks, meaning parasitic little things that attach themselves to the skin of terrestrials and suck out plasma.

There is, you might say, an image problem here. The solution is a sense of humour. To amuse is to defuse.