Cheers now, but a tough decision looms - The Globe and Mail


There's still a lot of boy in us aging baby boomers, even the bear-like, jack-of-all-trades Minister Rich Coleman.

So yes, that really was the imposing Mr. Coleman whooping and hollering and leaping around like a kid at Hastings Racecourse last month, as the Preakness came to its thundering, thrilling close and jockey Mario Gutierrez frantically nudged I'll Have Another's nose in front at the finish line.

Super Mario, of course, is the feel-good, fairy-tale story of the year, coming from an impoverished Mexican background to the local Hastings track, where he honed his riding trade for five years, and now, with the whole world watching, he and his mount are closing in on the fabled Triple Crown.

Mr. Coleman was among a group of people gathered to watch the Preakness in a private room at Hastings with horse owner Glen Todd, who gave Mario his big break.

As I'll Have Another made his electrifying, come-from-behind charge, the minister was, in his own words, 'jumping up and down like a five-year old, yelling at the TV. There were a couple of ladies and four or five guys, and we were all in a huddle, leaping up and down together, cheering. It was a lot of fun.'

Alas, there are no pictures of the jolly jumper's gravity-defying exertions, but you can bet a shiny new toonie that Rich Coleman's passion for horse racing is real. He loves the people who populate the track, the splendour of the races, and particularly the 5,000 jobs the industry provides.

When he's not searching for Reds under the bed, being gnarly to Gregor or tending to the dozen or so other duties in his ample portfolio, Mr. Coleman ponders horse racing.

He keeps corralling responsibility for it like an errant steer. This is the third time Mr. Coleman has taken charge of the equine fleet-of-foot since he joined the cabinet in 2001. The troubled sport of kings has no better advocate in government.

But neither Mario nor the minister are economic magicians. Although the Hastings handle is up this year, times remain tough. The future viability of maintaining two Greater Vancouver racetracks - Hastings for thoroughbreds and Cloverdale's Fraser Downs for harness racing - is open to question.

Mr. Coleman agrees: 'Closing one of the tracks is a theoretical possibility. It's one of those things the industry is going to have to come to grips with.'

If the hammer does fall, which track survives, Hastings or Fraser Downs?

The minister's irritation at what he considers Vancouver's niggardly attitude towards Hastings, which sits on city land, could tip the balance towards the haven of harness racing.

Parking is free at Cloverdale, but not at Hastings. Even more bothersome, says Mr. Coleman, is the PNE's practice of charging fair admission to track patrons who merely want to attend the races during the annual exhibition.

And there is still no agreement to replace the lease between the city and track operators Great Canadian Gaming, which expires Oct. 31. At the moment, choosing between Hastings and Cloverdale would not be that difficult, according to Mr. Coleman.

'One side is trying to negotiate a contract that makes sense for the city of Vancouver,' he says. 'The other side has a mayor out in Surrey who says my arms are open. The track is great for my community.'

Crunch time may be sooner rather than later. The minister expects a comprehensive report on the future of horse racing in B.C. to be on his desk as early as next month. The report is certain to address the Hastings/Cloverdale issue.

One hopes the city is not distracted too much by the Mario Madness - due to deliver another big jolt to the eastside track on Saturday - and saddles up to secure a good deal for its future.

Losing the storied, scenic Hastings Racecourse would be grievous indeed. Not to mention the 2,000 or so jobs transplanted to distant Surrey. Long may she run.

***

What is it about B.C. politicians and boozing at breakfast?

Last week, NDP MLA John Horgan apologized for suggesting that a barrage of heckling from the mouth that roars, Liberal backbencher Kevin Krueger, was prompted by too much wine over the breakfast table.

That incident recalled the expensive sally of yore by the NDP's Dave Stupich. He asserted that Bill Bennett, then premier of the province, was known to pour a bit of Scotch on his morning cornflakes. Mr. Bennett apparently got up on the wrong side of the bed that day, however, and sued Mr. Stupich successfully for $10,000.

I'm a bourbon on bagel guy myself.

***

Can someone help? My memory, like nostalgia, isn't what it used to be. What year was it, again, when we cared about the environment? Glad it all got fixed up.