Great guns! The origin of the 21-gun salute - The Globe and Mail


Belay, me hearties! Welcome aboard the good ship Collected Wisdom. We're about to receive a gun salute from a sister ship of the line. Funny, though, those cannons seem to be pointing right at us.

The question

What is the origin of the 21-gun salute? asksJohn Yorke of New Glasgow, N.S.

The answer

Richard Gimblett, acting director of navy history and heritage for the Department of National Defence, suggested that we consultThe Oxford Companion to Ships and the Sea. He didn't steer us wrong.

Gun salutes, the book says, started as a naval tradition whereby one ship would pay its respects to another. These salutes 'were fired on every possible occasion and were often unlimited in extent, largely due to a predilection of naval officers of all nations for loud and prolonged noise, and it was not until 1675 that regulations were introduced in Britain, quickly followed by all other maritime nations, limiting the number of guns to be fired,' it says.

It points out that the number of salutes was curtailed to stop a considerable waste of gunpowder.

'Samuel Pepys, secretary of the British Admiralty, worked out a scale based on a minimum salute of three guns up to 19 guns for the admiral of the fleet. Two more guns were added for a salute to the monarch, and a royal or presidential salute still remains at 21 guns.'

The odd numbers for salutes were chosen, it says, because even numbers were fired at naval funerals as a sign of mourning for the dead officer.

Further notice

Here's a historical postscript to an item we published a while ago about how water stored in towers for steam locomotives was kept from freezing in winter. (The water tower was enclosed in a wood-framed structure and heated with a coal-burning stove.)

Phyllis Gauthier of Ayer's Cliff, Que., writes: 'My husband, George Gauthier, now 86, grew up in the CNR village of Depot Harbour on Parry Island in Georgian Bay. His dad, Edmour Gauthier, was a pump man. His job was to feed coal into a boiler that created steam to run the pump that filled the water tank. This tank served as water supply to the village as well as the locomotives.

'His memory of the tank was that it was heated by a coal-oil lamp. One time, the lamp fell over, starting a fire in the wooden casing. Fortunately, it was extinguished before too much damage was done. Edmour was made redundant during the Depression as electricity was then used to keep the pumps going. Depot Harbour no longer exists and has returned to its beginnings as a native reserve.'

Help wanted

Every so often we take a second look at questions we thought were interesting but that didn't generate any answers. Here are some from the past five months. If you can shed any light on them, let's hear from you.

From an evolutionary standpoint, why have human females shed most facial hair while males have retained it?Izzy Livne-Bar of Toronto wants to know.

Bryce Kendrick of Sidney, B.C., would like to know what the extreme ranges of human blood pressure can be - from when a person is sleeping to weightlifting to running the 100-metre dash.

Why are there so few female symphony-orchestra conductors?Paul Bergman of Waterloo, Ont., wants to know.

Roger Young of West Vancouver wants to know why cats don't like water.

AndEric Morris of Montreal asks: Do pets prefer to drink water that's cold or at room temperature?

Let's hear from you: If you can answer one of these questions (or have a question of your own), please e-mailwisdom@globeandmail.com . Please include your location and a daytime phone number.