Toronto's new tourist attraction: Come see the Rob Ford Follies - The Globe and Mail


I was at a party last week in New York when a man asked where I'm from, and I responded, 'Toronto.'

'Oh, the city with the really embarrassing mayor,' the man said to me, and for a second I felt shame. And then it occurred to me that many cities pay to obtain that kind of international brand recognition.

I've grown accustomed to blank stares when I say I'm from Toronto. Now, the name Toronto is evocative to people, like other great cities' names: I Love New York; Paris, the City of Light; Toronto, the City with the World's Most Embarrassing Mayor.

I began to wonder whether it was possible to harness the reputation of our mayor to benefit the city I love.

Pisa, after all, has built a tourist industry around an inelegant, shoddily built tower. Here in Toronto, we have Mayor Rob Ford and his brother, Councillor Doug Ford: This is a bit like having a tower tilting toward earth at a full 35-degree angle, from which one can conveniently watch an endless car accident.

Last week, Rob Ford charged out of his house, yelling, with his fists raised, toward a Toronto Star reporter, who had come to view a portion of a city park by Mr. Ford's house that the mayor wants to buy - for, he says, security reasons.

Why Rob Ford, whose property is already fenced, believes that purchasing a 50-by-56-foot piece of parkland and erecting another fence will increase his security, I don't know. The only person known to have breached Mr. Ford's Etobicoke perimeter is his own sister's ex-boyfriend, fresh from jail. Perhaps there was a Christmas dinner once and this hypothetical question was raised: 'What would stop you from breaking into a man's house?' And a family member piped up: 'Ethically, I draw the line at walking an additional 50 feet.'

Mr. Ford later claimed that Star journalist Daniel Dale, a City Hall reporter and therefore a man he sees often, was standing on cinderblocks and peering over his fence. Police investigated and said this week that they had found 'no evidence' that this was true. Honestly, if I had security concerns around my backyard fence, the first thing I'd do is move any stray cinderblocks stacked nearby. It can't help to build steps.

Meanwhile, Mr. Ford stood by, chortling, while a guest on his radio show (having just delivered a homophobic rant about another local politician) accused the Star of deliberately sending 'its most effeminate reporter' in order to make the mayor look as bad as possible when he erupted in one of his legendary fits of rage. I doubt it, but if so, the newspaper was overestimating the general public's dedication to the cause of protecting effeminate men - it would have been a better plan to send Dame Jane Goodall and the Dalai Lama, walking a really cute puppy.

We're stuck with this mayor for over two years more. But it needn't be all bad. I hereby invite the rest of Canada, and indeed the world, to visit Toronto, the City with the World's Most Embarrassing Mayor! Forgo your drive to the Reversing Falls: Imagine the children's wonder at the Reversing Council, a place where the mayor has lost so much support that nothing ever stays decided! I love your Giant Nickel, Sudbury, Ont. But come and see Toronto's Actual-Sized Nickel - it represents how much the mayor wants to spend on daycare spaces! Imagine the thrill of, for a small fee, having your own expert commission overridden by the mayor's brother's plan for a giant Ferris wheel! Stay a week and have our mayor insult you in newspapers and on local radio! Or attend the Official Weighing of the Mayor - an actual event wherein, in the hopes of getting a rare, short statement from their highest elected municipal official, qualified journalists stand around and watch him perform one aspect of his personal toilette.

If this takes off, journalists hoping to get a statement from Prime Minister Stephen Harper on, say, the expansion of our bilateral trade agreement with Chile will have to watch him floss his teeth first.

Possibly this program of economic development will be so beneficial that other cities will attempt to have their own Really Embarrassing Mayors. They may apply for federal assistance.

And this is how some lucky town will end up with Mayor Vic Toews.