If only traffic safety rules could outlaw human stupidity - The Globe and Mail


While death and injury due to road-traffic collisions have been declining in recent years, they remain a burden everywhere.

In Metro Vancouver, between 30 and 40 pedestrians die each year as a result of being hit by a moving vehicle of some sort. In Greater Toronto, the average is just slightly lower. In Quebec, there were 71 pedestrians killed by an automobile in 2011, up from 59 the previous year.

I've now been driving for 40 years. I've been behind the wheel of a car in many parts of the world. And considering the experience in life's rear view mirror, I'm surprised there aren't more people killed every day as a result of all manner of negligence and ignorance.

On those days that I drive into work, I return home at the end of the day by turning right on a busy downtown Vancouver street. Drivers get an advance green that allows five or six cars to turn before the pedestrian onslaught at the intersection begins. During this 15-second-or-so interval, pedestrians are looking at a DO NOT CROSS sign.

And yet, not infrequently there is some idiot who defies the flashing message and decides to walk across anyway. Not surprisingly, these people almost get hit by a car that is lawfully turning right. Inevitably, there is much screeching of brakes and middle fingers being flashed and a shaking of heads by pedestrians who can't believe how stupid one of their fellow human beings can be.

Here's something else I experience regularly.

I run. Not very fast. In fact, very slowly. But I run a few times a week, mostly in and around my suburban Vancouver neighbourhood. It doesn't matter when I run, the one constant is this: When I come up to an intersection and have the right of way to cross, I'll encounter a driver turning right who is only looking left to see if a car is coming. And if no car is there, they proceed without checking to see if anyone is walking in front of them from the right.

I can't tell you the number of times that I would have been smacked, killed possibly, by a car if I had assumed my right of passage and not stopped to make sure the car turning right saw me. Today, I never cross a road assuming a car set to turn is going to be sure there are no pedestrians crossing in front of them.

And all of this is to say? That my personal experience would indicate accidents involving pedestrians and cars are the result of shockingly poor decisions by people at both ends of the equation. And in the late fall, during monsoon season when the skies out here are a perpetual slate grey and driver visibility is markedly reduced, conditions for mayhem and carnage increase dramatically.

Apparently, human behaviour is an understudied factor in pedestrian injury. At least, according to a study published out of Simon Fraser University. This surprises me. I would have thought human behaviour would be an obvious place to begin.

The purpose of the paper by Jonathan Cinnamon, Nadine Schuurman and S. Morad Hameed was to examine the potential link between violations made by pedestrians and motorists at intersections and collisions between the two groups. The authors' hypothesis was that the origins of accidents at high-incident intersections vary greatly and so require different remedies in response.

About 9,000 pedestrians and 18,000 vehicles were observed during the study period. The authors found that more than 2,000 (21 per cent) pedestrians committed some type of violation, while about 1,000 drivers (5.9 per cent) were responsible for some type of contravention of road rules.

Indeed, the study found that incidents involving pedestrians and cars were the result of a multitude of factors and so there was not a one-size-fits-all solution in preventing them in future.

There seems to be conflicting evidence regarding the distribution of fault in incidents involving automobiles and pedestrians.

A recent study by the city of Vancouver, for instance, found that in 80 per cent of the collisions involving pedestrians and automobiles that were looked at, pedestrians had the right of way and drivers were at fault.

That seems to be in line with a contemporary Hawaii report, which showed that motorists were 12 times more likely to be at fault in pedestrian-motor vehicle collisions. But in Washington and Baltimore, a fresh analysis revealed pedestrians more likely to be responsible for the accidents than drivers.

All of which is to say that while I applaud the city of Vancouver's recently announced efforts to reduce pedestrian-motor vehicle accident rates, you can't legislate against human stupidity. And with pedestrians and drivers more distracted than ever, the city's job is even harder.