Ottawa should not have to pay for provinces' trade violations - The Globe and Mail


A NAFTA panel ruling last month against Canada, in favour of Exxon Mobil Oil Corp. and Murphy Oil Corp., is a reminder of an unsolved riddle: What should the federal government do about having to pay, under international trade treaties, to compensate for the actions of provinces?

The previous instance was quite dramatic. In 2008, Danny Williams, who was then the Progressive Conservative premier of Newfoundland and Labrador, suddenly decided to expropriate assets of AbitibiBowater Inc., in an angry reaction to the company's closing of a newsprint mill.

In 2010, the federal government prudently settled with AbitibiBowater for $130-million, but Stephen Harper, the Prime Minister, said that a mechanism would be created so that Ottawa could recover such payments from a provincial government. Maybe there was some quiet detente; Mr. Williams' overheated Anything But Conservative campaign in the 2008 federal election - over an equalization payments dispute - was not renewed.

But no such mechanism to indemnify Ottawa has ever materialized. In the latest instance of this problem, the oil companies sued both Canada and Newfoundland and Labrador (on balance, successfully), because of a regulation of the Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board that requires that a certain amount of research and development be done in the province. The chairman of the C-NLOPB has blithely said that the regulation will not be changed unless both the federal and provincial Crowns tell the board to do so.

Premier Kathy Dunderdale is certainly less confrontational than Mr. Williams, her predecessor. Nonetheless, she and the other Atlantic premiers are unhappy about the federal government's proposals on Employment Insurance and seasonal workers.

Fortunately, the provinces are to be parties to any trade agreement between Canada and the European Union. But that, of course, does not help with NAFTA. The federal government cannot simply be a guarantor for the consequences of the provinces' actions. A compromise is needed; it would be unfortunate if Ottawa had to threaten the provinces with making deductions from its payments to the provinces - from health and social transfers or equalization.