Selling a home as easy as fulfilling buyers' wildest dreams - The Globe and Mail


It is June in Vancouver, and the rains have sprouted the usual crop of real-estate signs in neighbourhoods across the city.Clearly, this is not the market of a decade ago, or even a year ago. In fact when it comes to transactions, last month was the slowest May since 2001, with prices dropping by about 15 per cent over last year. Even sales of single-family homes are slipping, in some of the city's most desirable postal codes.

'Buyers' market,' though, is a relative term. This is, after all, Vancouver. The absence of an acrimonious sidewalk bidding war, and having the time to actually arrange an inspection, is pretty much our definition of a buyers' market. Buyers are being more patient, and as a result some homes (are you sitting down?) are selling at, or even below, asking price.

While that sinks in, I have good news: Home-stagers will save us all.

I've been spending a lot of time with HGTV these days. I'm not sure why. We have no intention of selling our tiny, bursting half-a-house any time soon. So daunting is the advice about preparing your home for sale that I am now resigned to the fact that I will very likely convalesce and expire at my current address. Which may require the installation of a walk-in bathtub and one of those chairs that carries you up the stairs. Which is another story.

Staging your home begins at the curb. First impressions count with those drive-by lookie-loos.

Begin by hiring someone to paint your entire house, build you a nice new fence, and redo all of the landscaping. Don't cut corners! A savvy buyer can tell the difference between a cheap ceramic pot from the Home Depot and a $400 ceramic pot from Hobbs. Go for the Hobbs.

Clean all gutters and windows and consider re-roofing.

Indoors, begin by renting a large storage locker and removing everything inside your home.

This may require moving your family to a furnished basement suite for as long as it takes to close the deal. If you have children, consider putting them in boarding school. Yes, you may miss them, but either you're serious about selling this dump or you're not.

Clean the entire home. Not a 'your mother's coming over' sort of clean where you wipe down baseboards and rent a rug shampooer from Safeway. Hire a professional cleaning company that specializes in toxic waste spills, crime scenes and other hazmat situations. You want your house Three Mile Island clean!Paint all of your walls and ceilings the colour of mushrooms. Better neutral than you offend a potential buyer with your horrible, horrible taste.

Replace all appliances, lighting fixtures, light switches and bathroom fixtures. Again, don't skimp! Industrial eight-burner stoves with overhead broilers and full-sized pizza ovens are now standard in many new residential kitchens.

Remember, you are competing against new homes that smell like paint and epoxy and lacquer, which not only have deleterious effects that may cloud a buyer's judgment and cause them to bid over asking, but are proven male aphrodisiacs.

Now that you're working with a clean slate, start putting things back - just not your own things.

This is the home stager's time to shine!First, the installation of a white sofa that looks like a bench from the Moderna Museet in Stockholm, two chairs, and no fewer than 18 cushions, making it impossible to sit on anything.

Then, a flat-screen TV bolted to the wall in a location where there is no hope of ever running cable to it. Next up, filling out empty built-in bookshelves with indecipherable hunks of polished aluminum that will pass as 'sculpture.'

Actual books are acceptable, but no more than five on a shelf and each must be approved by Oprah or Heather.

Keep an endless Bon Iver playlist running on the new Bose sound system you have installed in the main area.

Bedrooms should include only a bed, a side table and lamp.

In the trade, this is laughingly referred to as 'Guantanamo Chic.'

It will be up to you to purchase several high-end suits, dresses, shirts or blouses and sweaters, as well as pairs of shoes to fill out the closet space. Never include clothing you would actually wear.

Remember, buyers don't just buy a house - they buy an aspiration. Lease a luxury car and park it in front of your house. If your neighbours are a problem, pay to send them on holiday.

Follow these simple rules and I promise, even in this market, you will succeed.

I know, you're thinking: 'Can I afford to do all of this?'

I think you know the answer to that. You can't afford not to.

Stephen Quinn is the host of On the Coast on CBC Radio One, 88.1 FM and 690 AM in Vancouver. @cbcstephenquinn