Furthering the goal of gentrification - The Globe and Mail


Meanwhile, in a Trout Lake Community Centre multipurpose room ...

Chair: I'd like to call this meeting of the Grandview-Woodlands Gentrification Society to order. Move for approval of the minutes of the meeting of May 8th?

Stephanie: Moved and seconded.

Chair: All those in favour?

Chris: Oh, wait, I have a question. A correction maybe. On the issue of Pigeon-Guy, I abstained. I didn't vote for banning him from The Drive. I voted yes on Sunglasses Lady.

Chair: Right, okay. Move for correction of the minutes. Now on to new business.

Will: Yes, Report 1A: Closing of the Crepe place.

Stephanie: I know, so sad.

Will: Tell me about it.

Karlah: Sad is right. That didn't last long.

Will: We thought they had a chance, and our effort to push members there for breakfast was only a partial success, but now we have another vacant storefront.

Ron: I blame the gluten. The place was practically made of gluten.

Stephanie: And the coffee was weird; I never really got it.

Pat: They could have bussed the tables more than once a day.

Karlah: God, I know! What is that ... my job?

Chair: Agreed. Whatever the reason, we need to actively seek a new tenant we can all agree will further our goal of gentrification.

Will: Man, first Cobs Bread, now this.

Chair: Is anyone actively soliciting the sort of business we'd like to see move in?

Karlah: My friend makes handbags out of old album covers, but she says the rent is really expensive.

Chair: Is there a chance?

Karlah: I'll ask. I know, I know, 'Find us a tenant, or a Money Mart will rent it.'

(All laugh)

Chair: That's not funny; it's true. Find a tenant, people! And not another cupcake place. I give that joint another month.

Will: Okay, Report 2A: The homeless people hanging out in the parks. Our homeless harassment phone-chain has been working well. We've managed to push them out of Grandview, but then they turned up at Victoria Park. Now we have reports they've moved to McSpadden. They're smoking and drinking and peeing in the community garden there.

Stephanie: Ugh! God!

Ron: I've been talking to the Community Policing Office and apparently it's not against the law. Not the drinking and smoking and peeing part, of course, but the hanging out in parks thing. The police say it's not against the law to be in a park with no money.

Chair: Really?

Ron: Yes, it's true. And if police are going to issue a ticket they have to, get this, 'catch them in the act.'

Will: Oh, yeah? What, like us seeing it isn't good enough? We're not renters, you know!

Chair: Easy there, Will. We know, we know.

Ron: But we may be able to get them on off-leash dogs.

Karlah: Really? The dog enforcement people don't seem to give a ...

Will: ... a crap?

(All laugh)

Ron: But seriously, if one of the dogs mauls a child, we have a pretty good case.

Stephanie: Last I saw, they were camped out in China Creek.

Ron: Good. South of Broadway. Not our problem.

Chair: Noted. Next item?

Will: 3A: Bongos. Still waiting for a legal opinion. Let's table that one.

Chair: Done. 4A: The smoking bylaw.

Karlah: I've got this one. I say we start a 'shame the smokers' campaign. It worked for prostitutes in the west end in the 80s.

Stephanie: Yeah, I was like, five!

Karlah: Take their pictures, put them up on our website. We could make it look legit by sticking up a link to the provincial program that offers free nicotine patches.

Chair: Nice. Have we run that by legal?

Karlah: Totally legal, as long as we're on public property and don't use a super-long telephoto lens.

Chair: Nice work. How soon can we go live?

Karlah: Give me the word. My nanny's a total wiz.

Chair: All right. Other business?

Ron: This is new business, but have you noticed the number of convenience store clerks watching YouTube in some other language? It's like, 'Hello, I'm here with this handful of arugula and I'd very much like your attention!'

Stephanie: So annoying. And with kids there!

Karlah: You said it, sister.

Chris: So ... what? We ban laptops in convenience stores?

Will: Or at least wi-fi?

Chris: We could make it another health thing - like the smart meter people.

Will: Do they rent those stores or do they own them?

Chair: Good question. Let's look into that. Meeting adjourned! Who's hungry?

Stephanie: Me!

Karlah: Me too!

Ron: I could eat.

Chris: Starving.

Chair: Let's flip a coin. Heads it's C, tails it's West.

Stephen Quinn is the host of On the Coast on CBC Radio One, 88.1 and 690 AM in Vancouver. @cbcstephenquinn