A fluttering of wings to lift the heart - The Globe and Mail


For some people, spring comes with the first crocus or daffodil, for others the first lunch on a sidewalk patio. For me, it's the arrival of a little brown bird.

Every year, as reliably as the equinox, a hermit thrush appears in my downtown backyard. It's a small yearly miracle that never fails to lift my heart.

The hermit thrush is hardly a city bird. It spends its summers in the cool woods of the north. You rarely see it then, because its brown-grey back and speckled white breast are perfect camouflage in the dappled light of the forest.

You know it is there only by its haunting song, perhaps the most beautiful of any North American bird. One ornithology site calls it a 'clear, flute-like note followed by a series of ethereal, bell-like ascending and descending tones,' but words can't really do it justice.

My yard is hardly ideal habitat for any bird life, much less a bird like the thrush. A rectangle of bare lock stone behind a semi-detached Victorian, it is surrounded by an eight-foot fence. The only vegetation in early spring, when the overhanging chestnut tree is still bare, is the vine that pours over the fence top.

Yet my thrush comes year after year. It hops along the fence looking for bugs among the vine leaves. It stands sentry on the roof of the bike shed. It flicks its reddish tail, a telltale gesture that sets it apart from other species of thrush. One year, it perched next to the exhaust pipe from the furnace, having a steam bath on a bitterly cold day. It stays for a day or two, then moves on.

Each spring, I wait for it to arrive, fearing this will be the year it finally fails to show. It hasn't disappointed me yet.

Why it keeps coming back is a mystery. My yard sits at the top of a cement lane that ends in a row of closely packed houses. Maybe, I theorize, the bird comes north from the lake yard by yard, meets the wall of houses and decides it's a good place to stop and rest.

I don't even know if it is the same bird every year, although a bird-watching friend says it could be. She once saw a tiny yellow warbler return from the tropics to the same spot on the Lake Erie shore where it had been caught and banded a year earlier.

All I know is that it strikes me as magical that this fragment of life on the wing should pause on its epic journey at my urban back door. A hermit thrush is smaller than a robin and no heavier than a breakfast egg. If it has wintered in the southern United States or in Mexico, it will already have flown 2,000 to 4,000 kilometres before it reaches Toronto, a popular stop for migrants after their exhausting non-stop trip over Lake Ontario.

Travelling by night and navigating in ways that we still don't fully understand - perhaps by the stars, perhaps by sensing changes in the earth's magnetic field, perhaps even by using its sense of smell - it may travel another thousand kilometres or more before it arrives at its breeding grounds as far north in Ontario as James Bay.

And yet there it is in my yard, just steps from a busy crosstown street filled with rumbling streetcars - a glimpse of the wild in the concrete heart of the city.

This spring, I first caught sight of the thrush as I was rushing out the back door to take my kid to school on Wednesday. It wasn't its call that alerted me. It doesn't seem to utter that famous song when passing through Toronto, saving it for breeding season up north.

But my sixth sense tingled for some reason and I took a quick look around. There it was, perching on the next-door neighbour's fence, fluttering its wings and staring around with an unblinking black eye. I stood stock-still and watched.

'What is it?' asked my daughter. 'A bird,' I said quietly. 'A hermit thrush.'