On June 26 Breitbart News reported that Vance claimed ‚ÄoeISIS‚Äù supported national reciprocity because it would make it easier for them to acquire guns. The Hill quoted Vance claiming that supporters of reciprocity are ‚Äoeplaying into the hand‚Äù of the Islamic State, and he tried to bolster this claim by pointing to the ‚Äoeease‚Äù of buying guns in some states versus others. He said, ‚ÄoeISIS is paying close attention to this [national reciprocity] bill as well.‚Äù One gets the image of the Islamic State sitting around the dinner table, passing the mashed potatoes and gravy, while small-talking among themselves about how they hope national reciprocity can be secured for the purposes of advancing terrorism. Rep. Hudson read Vance‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s words and observed that Vance ‚Äoeneeds to educate himself‚Äù before speaking about national reciprocity in the future. Hudson wrote: With all due respect, the district attorney needs to educate himself on H.R. 38 before making such disparaging and false statements. He outrageously accused the 200 co-sponsors of this bill‚Ä"both Democrats and Republicans‚Ä"of ‚Äoeplaying into the hand‚Äù of ISIS and other terrorists, attempting to support his point by saying terrorists can ‚Äoeeasily obtain guns‚Äù in some states. The chief law enforcement officer should be above dishonesty and scare tactics, but I guess desperate times call for desperate lies. He explained that national reciprocity will likely face opposition from anti-gun politicians, but he did not expect the NY County DA to tie national reciprocity to ISIS. Hudson wrote: Nationwide concealed carry doesn‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t make it any easier to buy a gun. This bill has nothing to do with the purchase of a gun. Every person who wants to buy a firearm in America would still have to go through a thorough federal background check‚Ä"my bill would not change that. Contrary to his statements, my bill would empower Americans to protect themselves and their families if they ever, God forbid, face a terrorist who wants to do them harm. In short, concealed carry reciprocity is a terrorist‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s worst nightmare. Hudson is correct in that ‚Äoeconcealed carry reciprocity is a terrorist‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s worst nightmare,‚Äù because it allows law-abiding citizens to be armed for self defense more often versus less often. This means a terrorist planting a bomb in a trashcan or pulling a gun to shoot innocents will have to adapt to the increased chance that every one bullet he shoots will be answered with three, five, or even more, coming back at him. Such a scenario sure beats living in a world where gun control fanatics have rendered innocents defenseless via a patchwork of concealed carry laws that criminalize law-abiding citizens for being armed for self-defense in certain states. Breitbart News spoke to Rep. Hudson about national reciprocity and the NY County DA‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s criticism of it. Hudson said, ‚ÄoeThe anti-gun left will do anything to bring down this bill and take away our Second Amendment rights. I remain as determined as ever to advance this common sense bill to ensure law-abiding citizens can legally carry concealed firearms to defend themselves.‚Äù AWR Hawkins is the Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News and host of Bullets with AWR Hawkins, a Breitbart News podcast. He is also the political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: . Reach him directly at awrhawkins.com.