According to the San Jose Mercury News, protesters wore rainbow tutus and danced to electronic music as they rallied outside City Hall and held signs that read ‚ÄoeNo Ban, No Wall, Welcome Sisters and Brothers.‚Äù Other causes were also evident. Some attendees reportedly wore white and painted their crotches red ‚Ä" to represent the color of oxidized blood ‚Ä" and held up signs protesting male and female circumcision. Great to see and the rest of the gang doing their bit yet again on the streets of San Francisco. #sanfranciscopride ‚Ä" Patrick Smyth () June 25, 2017 Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) and male circumcision are not comparable. Indivisible San Francisco, the local chapter of a national activist effort against Trump, also participated in the event: Today, we march for LBGTQ rights, and we #standindivisible to march for social justice for everyone. #sfpride2017 #resistmarch #LoveIsLove ‚Ä" Indivisible SF () June 25, 2017 And it begins. #ResistMarch ‚Ä" brett Klein () June 21, 2017 According to the Mercury News, some attendees and protesters see ‚Äoethreats to gay rights in the Trump era. Frank Reyes said he and his husband decided to march for the first time in many years because they felt a need to stand up for their rights. The couple joined the ‚Äoeresistance contingent,‚Äù which led the parade and included representatives from several activist organizations. ‚ÄoeWe have to be as visible as possible,‚Äù said Reyes, wearing a silver body suit and gray and purple headpiece decorated with rhinestones. ‚ÄoeThings are changing quickly and we have to take a stand and be noticed,‚Äù Reyes‚Ä<sup>TM</sup> husband, Paul Brady, added. ‚ÄoeWe want to let everybody know that we love each other, that we pay taxes and that we‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>re Americans, too.‚Äù Earlier this month, the Hollywod ‚ÄoeResist March‚Äù reportedly saw thousands turn out with profane signs and messages attacking the president, the Republican Party, and conservatives in general in the overpopulated deep blue state of California, where Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton received 8 million votes. Adelle Nazarian is a politics and national security reporter for Breitbart News. Follow her on Facebook and Twitter.