Students are arguing that the piece of discarded plastic wrap, which was tied off in a small knot at one end, was meant to represent a noose. In April, an actual noose was found at the Phi Kappa Tau fraternity house on the University of Maryland campus. #UMD This was found under a tree at frat row. Police say that since it wasn't hanging‚Ä¶it's just trash Make your own conclusions ‚Ä" Jaime Hurtado () June 27, 2017 Information on the University of Maryland Police report on the incident is publicly accessible. The department announced on Tuesday that they ‚Äoeare looking into this matter and conducting a review of our cameras in the area.‚Äù The results of the department‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s inconsequential ‚Äoepreliminary investigation‚Äù revealed that the material discarded on the ground is typically used ‚Äoethat this type of material is used to contain and protect loose items during transport.‚Äù ‚ÄoeEarlier today, we were notified of a knotted piece of plastic wrap laying on the ground in the 7500 block of Baltimore Ave. Police were notified out of concern for possible hate-bias,‚Äù the department‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s statement reads. ‚ÄoeWe encourage the university community to continue to reach out to us when concerned as we work together to create a safer campus,‚Äù the report adds. The report claims that the department was notified by two individuals who were concerned that the discarded plastic wrap could possibly represent a ‚Äoehate-bias‚Äù incident. Users on Twitter were quick to take issue with those who were propping up the trash as evidence of bigotry on the University of Maryland‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s campus. I conclude you have a severe lack of intelligence and also too much time to waste. ‚Ä" Ateo consecuente () June 28, 2017 If you are interested (not trolling) I can tell you EXACTLY what that is. And there are tens of thousand made daily in warehouses in the USA ‚Ä" RussellMac () June 28, 2017 My conclusion: You're looking for trouble that isn't there. THIS is why SJWs are seen as a hysterical jokeTHIS is why Trump got elected ‚Ä" DaThingsIveSeen () June 28, 2017 : Looks like trash to me. Then again, I'm not one to look for a hate crimes where none exist. ‚Ä" DJ 8 Man () June 28, 2017 Tom Ciccotta is a libertarian who writes about economics and higher education for Breitbart News. You can follow him on Twitter or email him at tciccotta.com