Santos Portillo Andrade (aka ‚ÄoeFlaco‚Äù), 33, committed aggravated assault on an unidentified individual believed to be a rival gang member, information obtained by Breitbart Texas from the U.S. Attorney‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s Office for the District of Massachusetts revealed. The aggravated assault occurred in Malden, MA in December of 2008. ‚ÄoeMS-13 members are required to commit acts of violence against rival gang members to gain promotions and maintain membership and discipline within the group. Specifically, MS-13 members are required to attack and murder rival gang members whenever possible,‚Äù DOJ officials said in a written statement. The drug charges involved 100 grams or more of heroin and 500 grams or more of cocaine. The RICO conspiracy charge provides for a sentence of up to 20 years in prison, three years of supervised release, and a possible fine of $250,000. Drug trafficking conspiracy is a mandatory five years in prison but a maximum of 40 years and the possible fine can be up to $5 million. Possessing a firearm in furtherance of drug trafficking carry‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s a mandatory five years that is served consecutively to any sentence imposed on RICO conspiracy. Conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute heroin and cocaine charges could bring a sentence of three years of supervised release, and a possible fine of $250,000. The judge will sentence Portillo Andrade on September 26. The MS-13‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s plea agreement with prosecutors may be accepted or rejected by the federal judge ‚Ä" U.S. District Court Judge F. Dennis Saylor IV. If accepted, the judge will sentence him to 10 years in federal prison and four years of supervised release. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Boston Division worked with Homeland Security Investigations (HIS) and local law enforcement officials to develop the case. Breitbart Texas reported in October 2016 that Mauricio Sanchez, 29, (‚ÄoeTigre‚Äù) pleaded guilty to a charge of conspiracy to conduct enterprise affairs through a pattern of racketeering activity. The DOJ indicted Sanchez earlier that year with 60 other MS-13 gang members. The indictments grew out of a three-year investigation where alleged leaders, members, and associates of the MS-13 gang in the commonwealth were charged. Sanchez was a member of the MS-13 Eastside Loco Salvatrucha clique. His role was to ‚Äoejump in‚Äù new members of the gang. Sanchez also paid street dues to fund MS-13 activities in Massachusetts and El Salvador. Sanchez admitted that he and other members of the gang were involved in stabbing a member of a rival gang ‚Ä" reported to be a member of the rival 18th Street gang. The incident occurred near Bellingham Square in Chelsea in December 2015. Bob Price serves as associate editor and senior political news contributor for Breitbart Texas. He is a founding member of the Breitbart Texas team. Follow him on Twitter and Facebook.