The left never lets a good crisis go to waste. Within hours of the shooting of U.S. Representative Steve Scalise and other Republicans at a baseball field in Virginia, top Democrats were already calling for more gun control. Of course the shooter, 66-year-old James Hodgkinson, is from a state that already has some of the toughest gun laws in the entire nation. And the largest city in Illinois, Chicago, is plagued by rampant gun violence on a daily basis. Alternatively, crime rates tend to be very low where rates of gun ownership are very high. Up here in north Idaho, anyone that would dare to break into homes at night would have a very, very short criminal career. Gun owners are the number one crime deterrent, but liberals still don‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t understand this. Every time an Islamic terrorist or a crazed leftist starts shooting people, the left immediately pounces on it as an excuse to start promoting gun control again. For example, just consider what Virginia Governor Terry McAuliffe had to say just hours after the shooting‚Ä¶ Of course this is complete nonsense, but the truly frightening thing about this is that McAuliffe is very, very seriously thinking of running for president. In fact, from what I hear it is a near certainty that ‚ÄoeBill Clinton‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s best friend‚Äù will run in 2020 if Hillary Clinton does not. If many liberals had their way, even the police would be disarmed. But if the Capitol Hill police at that baseball field had not been armed on Wednesday, there would have been nobody to stop James Hodgkinson from killing one member of Congress after another‚Ä¶ In fact, Senator Paul believes that ‚Äoenobody would have survived‚Äù if the Capitol Hill Police had not been there to shoot back‚Ä¶ It could have easily been the worst tragedy in the history of the United States Congress. Even with such a quick response by the Capitol Hill Police, Representative Mo Brooks says that Hodgkinson still got off ‚Äoe50-100 shots‚Äù‚Ä¶ And of course this is far from an isolated incident. In an article earlier today, I noted the string of violent attacks on Republican members of Congress in recent months. The threats, violence and intimidation coming from the left are steadily getting worse, and I strongly believe that security for members of Congress needs to be greatly strengthened. In the past, we mainly had to be concerned about security for the President, the Vice-President and a handful of other really high profile targets, but now every single member of Congress is a potential target. I also believe that all members of Congress should be allowed to be armed no matter where they travel. Alternatively, a Secret Service detail could be assigned to each one, but that would be quite expensive. What is clear is that the limited security that we have gotten away with in the past for members of Congress simply is not going to work any longer. James Hodgkinson fully intended to kill every single Republican member of Congress on that baseball field. So if there is anyone out there that disagrees with me, I would ask you to carefully consider this eyewitness account from Representative Mike Bishop‚Ä¶ The bad guys are always going to be able to find weapons, and more gun control is never going to be the answer. In this case, I am so very thankful for the guns that were at that baseball field, because they saved a lot of lives today.