The Democrats are desperate for a win, so desperate that they are milking the dead Russia narrative for all that it is worth. Today, acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe exposed a truth bomb about the Russia probe that blows the lid off of the entire liberal storyline. According to The Gateway Pundit, multiple news outlets are claiming that, just prior to being fired, former FBI Director James Comey had sought more resources to investigate collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russian government. Last week, then-FBI Director James B. Comey requested more resources from the Justice Department for his bureau‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s investigation into collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russian government, according to two officials with knowledge of the discussion. Comey, who was fired by President Trump on Tuesday, made the request in a meeting last week with Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, and later briefed the chair and Democratic ranking member of the Senate Intelligence Committee on Monday, the officials said. [Source: The Washington Post] The New York Times also reported the same in an article titled Days Before Firing, Comey Asked For More Resources For Russia Inquiry. Reuters ran a similar story. So, all three of these mainstream news outlets reported that Comey wanted more resources, but none of them name a specific source. The best that they could do is to say ‚Äoecongressional sources‚Äù reported Comey‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s request. The only comment that came close to addressing the issue came from Democrat Senator Dianne Feinstein, who said, ‚ÄoeI was not. But I understand that there have been additional requests. That‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s all I can say.‚Äù So, we have lots of smoke, but no fire. That is how this had been shaping up ‚Ä" until today. Acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe spoke directly to the Senate Intelligence Committee on the issue, and he set the record straight. Watch his testimony, below: There you have it. The FBI has adequate resources to conduct an investigation and no request was made by former Director James Comey for more resources. These comments by Andrew McCabe are a testament to the witch hunt that Democrats and the liberal media are conducting, trying everything that they can to discredit Donald Trump with fictional ties to Russia. If Diane Feinstein, The Washington Times, Reuters, and The New York Times have specific information on this supposed corruption in the firing of James Comey, they need to come forward with it. If not, they should retract their stories and stick to the truth. Liberals should know by now that tactics like these are what got Donald Trump elected in the first place, as people are sick and tired of business as usual in politics. Now, another liberal narrative is starting to bite the dust, and no one should be all that surprised.