Parents of middle school students in Rockingham, North Carolina, are outraged at what some students are saying their black teacher forced only white kids to do in front of the class. Now, the shocking story has gone viral as parents demand that the principal and school district answer for what many are considering to be a hate crime against white kids. According to COED.com, multiple parents complained when they had heard that a black English teacher, identified as Tarsha Clarke, made white students in her class stand up and apologize to non-white students for their ‚Äoewhite privilege.‚Äù At a Rockingham School District meeting held on May 8, 2017, a couple of parents stood up and voiced their outrage over the incident and also the fact that the school‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s administration was trying to sweep it all under the rug. Watch, as these parents tell the school board exactly what is on their mind. The second parent is nowhere near as calm as the first parent in the clip. The first outraged parent who spoke was Farren Wilkinson. The description of the video uploaded to YouTube gives a transcript of Wilkinson‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s speech to the school board on Monday, May 8th, 2017. ‚ÄoeHello, my name is Farren Wilkinson ‚Ä¶ I just want to shed light on a situation that happened at Western Rockingham Middle School. Where a teacher caused some of her students to stand up and apologize to other students base on their inequal opportunities of education. So I would like to know how our schools can allow an educator to humiliate bully and degrade children. This is not a matter of race but a matter of a teacher using fear and the embarrassment of children to satisfy her own personal anger or beliefs. These children are not responsible nor accountable for any inequalities that are believed to be present,‚Äù Wilkinson said. ‚ÄoeThe actions of this educator does not provide safe, nurtureing, dynamic and integrative learning. If she is not held to the standards set by Rockingham County schools, how can we expect other children to learn and grow to be productive citizens in society,‚Äù Wilkinson continued, ‚ÄoeIf nothing happens, if she‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s not repremanded, for these actions, and when the parents call to ask what has been done. They are being assured that this was taken care of. But how was it taken care of? What did happen? What was her training? What was her consequences for this action? Because again, these children are not responsible for any inequalities that may exist in the school system nor should they be publicly humiliated among their peers for her own satisfaction.‚Äù I would say that Wilkinson‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s address to the school board was very tempered after hearing about the egregious alleged actions of Clarke. The next parent to stand up, however, was not as patient with the school board or the racist teacher who violated the civil rights of the white students in her class. ‚ÄoeHello, my name is Robert Jeremy,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄoeCommon sense, when did it become a good idea to attack a child at a school because they were white, or they were black, or they were straight, or they were Christian? Or because they believed in something moral that they were taught at home? You see I teach my child and my two older daughters family values, Christian values. I teach not to judge somebody by the color of their skin but by the color of their heart. And my child will not be insulted, reprimanded, corrected because he has a good moral fiber.‚Äù Stephanie Wray, the principal of Western Rockingham Middle School, was contacted by American Lens to ask about the incident where Clarke is accused of having white students in her class apologize for their ‚Äoewhite privilege.‚Äù Wray issued the following statement summarily denying the incident ever occurred, according to The Gateway Pundit. ‚ÄoeIn regard to your additional requests, I can not speak on any individual, however, any allegations brought to our attention are investigated thoroughly and proper disciplinary action is taken if needed. Again, I can not speak regarding specific individuals due to personnel law, however, the particular incident you asked about was unfounded to happen at our school,‚Äù wrote Wray. Wray did confirm that Clarke still retains her teaching position at the school. As this story continues to go viral, I think a proper investigation of the teacher and the school administrators will be conducted to produce a much more appropriate result. Forcing white students to stand up in front of their classmates to apologize for being white and ‚Äoeover-privileged‚Äù is sickening. The parents of these students deserve answers and recourse against not only the teacher but also against the principal and school board.