This week, President Donald Trump embarked on his first overseas trip as Commander-in-Chief. His visit to Saudi Arabia has strong significance: the strained ties that marked U.S.-Saudi relations under former President Barack Obama are officially over. In fact, when Trump will land, there will be a very ‚Äoespecial guest‚Äù waiting for him. To mark the occasion, Saudi Arabia lined up a variety of important individuals to celebrate President Trump‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s two-day visit. Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, Fox News host Bret Baier, and country singer Toby Keith will be waiting for the president. Keith has been a supporter of the Trump administration from the beginning, even performing at the president‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s inaugural concert when most celebrities refused to do so. Saudi Arabia is making every effort to dazzle and impress President Donald Trump on his first overseas trip, seizing on the visit to cement itself as a major player on the world stage and shove aside rival Iran. The kingdom has arranged a dizzying schedule of events for the two days Trump will be in town ‚Ä" inviting figures as varied as Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, who has been indicted for war crimes by the International Criminal Court, Bret Baier, a host on the Fox News Channel that is popular with Trump and his supporters, and American country singer Toby Keith, who is to perform for a male-only crowd in the Saudi capital, Riyadh. [Source: AP] ‚ÄoeSaudi Arabia is delighted at being the number-one (stop for Trump‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s visit), delighted by the re-emergence of a strong diplomatic relationship with the United States and delighted by the opportunity to show off Saudi leadership of the Arab and the Muslim world by getting everybody to turn up in Riyadh for multiple, overlapping summits,‚Äù remarked The Washington Institute‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s director of the Gulf and Energy Policy Program, Simon Henderson. Saudi Arabia even created a website specifically for information about the summit in English, Arabic, and French, as well as a clock that literally counts down the seconds until it begins. ‚ÄoeUnited under a single vision ‚Ä" Together We Prevail ‚Ä" this highly anticipated event, the first of its kind in history, will renew our mutual commitment to global security and further strengthen already deep business, cultural and political ties,‚Äù states the Riyadh Summit 2017 website. ‚ÄoeAs we bring the world together to confront violent extremist ideology, so too are we working in partnership with our American and Islamic allies to improve the lives of our people and strengthen our collective economies.‚Äù The success of the Arab Islamic American Summit flies in the face of those on the left who have called Trump a bigot and Islamophobe. If those accusations were true, he surely would not have chosen the Islamic world‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s center of influence as his first overseas destination as president. Contrary to what the left will tell you, Trump does not hate all Muslims or have some agenda to discriminate against them. His goal is to eradicate terrorism and keep the American people safe, something he is working towards diligently by establishing better diplomatic ties with Saudi Arabia.