It‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s graduation season, which means all manner of celebrities and politicians are delivering commencement speeches in which they refuse to abstain from getting political. Comedian Kumail Nanjiani, who stars in HBO‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s hit show Silicon Valley, is no different. The Pakistani immigrant delivered a graduation speech at his alma mater where he boldly told students to commit a sick act ‚Äoewith an immigrant.‚Äù Reflecting on his time at Grinnell College in Iowa, Nanjiani told graduates, ‚ÄoeWhen I came to Grinnell I was a devout Muslim who had never romantically touched a girl and I was going to get a degree that guaranteed me a job. By the time I graduated I was basically a Rastafarian with a white American girlfriend and a philosophy degree. College changes you, is my point.‚Äù College may have a reputation for changing young adults, although many times it isn‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t for the better. Campuses across the country have become nothing more than breeding grounds for the Democratic Party and indoctrination centers for the progressive agenda. Grinnell is surely no different. ‚ÄoeThis little liberal arts college in the middle of Iowa changed the way I saw the entire world,‚Äù added Nanjiani, according to Daily Mail. ‚ÄoeBefore America was my home, Iowa was my home. And before Iowa was my home, Grinnell was my home,‚Äù he added. ‚ÄoeSo here‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s another concrete piece of advice I can give you ‚Ä" have sex with an immigrant,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄoeWe‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>re going through a tough time right now, and it would just be really great for morale.‚Äù ‚ÄoeImmigration is a big topic of conversation right now ‚Ä" do we take in refugees or not, these people are so different from us‚Ä¶ And I will say this,‚Äù continued Nanjiani. ‚ÄoeRefugees are people who risked everything and left their homes in search of better lives for them and their families. What could be more American than that?‚Äù he added, showing just how ill-informed he is about the ‚Äoerefugee crisis.‚Äù ‚ÄoeTo those of you who were able to be here, as nervous as you were to get through customs and immigration, I hope that you are just as proud to watch your children walk across this stage. And I hope that today, you see the America that we love,‚Äù added the actor, according to HuffPost. ‚ÄoeEach other is all we have. This is all we got, this is all we have. And it may not be heaven, but it can be Iowa. Congratulations, class of 2017. Welcome to the real world. We need you out here.‚Äù Of course, having frivolous sexual encounters with immigrants is not going to solve anyone‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s problems. Luckily, we now have a president with more sense in his little finger than Nanjiani has in his entire being, and President Donald Trump is working tirelessly to fix our broken immigration system. What the left does not seem to realize is that we cannot help any immigrants if we allow so many to flood our borders that our infrastructure is completely ruined. Sooner or later, the tax dollars will run out; there simply is not an endless amount of federal aid to be doled out, as liberals seem to think. To help immigrants, in the long run, we must fix the immigration system we have now because it cannot sustain itself this way much longer.