First Lady Melania Trump has officially moved into the White House, along with 11-year-old Barron, the son she shares with President Donald Trump. As the family disembarked from Air Force One upon arriving at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, there were two other visitors in tow: Melania‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s parents, Viktor and Amalija Knavs. As soon as the first lady‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s father stepped off the plane, onlookers immediately noticed one striking detail about him. Indeed, it didn‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t take long at all for people to note the uncanny resemblance between Viktor Knavs and President Trump. The two men share a similar style, with Viktor donning the same dark suit and red tie Trump often chooses. They also appear to have the same gate, build, and many comparable facial expressions. Melania Trump's father looks like someone, can't quite put my finger on it ‚Ä" The Cut () June 12, 2017 Melania's father (left), and Melania's husband (right). Sigmund Freud is the photographer. ‚Ä" Gerry Fostaty () June 12, 2017 Twins!!!! Melania's father and husband! U ‚Ä" Matthew Jefferson () June 14, 2017 Metro first noted the undeniable resemblance between Trump and his father-in-law two years ago, at the time claiming, ‚Äoewith a little extra hair wax here and there, they could be twins.‚Äù Since Trump became president, though, more and more people have begun to notice the same thing. While the two men could be brothers, their similarities end with their political history. According to Western Journalism, during Melania‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s youth in Slovenia, which at the time was under the control of a Communist dictator, Viktor Knavs joined the Communist Party, presumably to take advantage of its benefits. This is likely how he and Amalija secured their government jobs. ‚ÄoeMaybe he was just being pragmatic,‚Äù a relative of the family told Daily Mail. ‚ÄoeBeing in the Party made things a bit easier and meant he could help his family.‚Äù Indeed, Viktor soon obtained a job as a manager at a state-owned car dealership, while his wife went from toiling on the family farm to working at a textile factory. The Knavs family remained close over the years, with Viktor and Amalija relocating all the way to New York when Melania moved to the United States in 1996 for her modeling career. They have now followed her to Washington, D.C., where they will help take care of Barron as their daughter tends to her duties as the first lady, but they will not reside full-time in the White House. They say women marry men who remind them of their fathers in some way, and that appears to be true of First Lady Melania Trump. They also say that children are a reflection of their parents, and Melania has already proven to be one of the classiest, most poised, and effortlessly elegant first ladies in history. Her parents will undoubtedly make a lovely addition to the scene in Washington, D.C., and at the White House. This will certainly be a welcome change from Michelle Obama‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s freeloading mother, who moved into the lap of luxury right alongside her daughter when Barack Obama was elected president. The Obamas presented her as a built-in nanny for their girls, but her true motives were soon revealed when she began vacationing with them around the world on the taxpayers‚Ä<sup>TM</sup> dime. Viktor and Amalija Knavs do not need taxpayer money to fund their lifestyle. Frankly, no one in the Trump family does, which is quite refreshing. Moreover, they won‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t be moving into the White House but rather tending to Barron as is required, which proves that they have made the moved the Washington in order to support their daughter and grandson, not to leech off the benefits afforded to the first family. We wish them all the best!