Now that they are taking a vacation from ‚Äoedefending the poor and helpless,‚Äù the elitist Obama family is staying in a $15,000 per night Italian village. A closer look at the ritzy getaway reveals a strange coincidence that people cannot help but notice. The Borgo Finocchieto village was developed and is owned by none other than Obama‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s friend who he also happened to appoint as Ambassador to Italy, lawyer John Phillips. Mr. Phillips decided the borgo should be brought back to life as a single entity, and in 2001 he bought it himself in what he called ‚Äoea moment of irrational exuberance.‚Äù Mr. Phillips, now 64, could afford to buy and renovate the borgo after decades as a public interest lawyer, during which he earned cuts of the considerable money that he helped recover for the California and federal governments from contractors accused of corruption. But he wondered whether he and his wife, Linda Douglass, then a correspondent for ABC News, really had a use for so many houses in the Italian countryside ‚Ä" even given their large extended family and network of friends. He decided that the borgo should double as a gathering place for ‚Äoepeople associated with charitable and educational issues.‚Äù Its beauty and history could help inspire creative thought and dialogue, he hoped; it would be nice, he joked, ‚Äoeto have the Mideast peace talks here.‚Äù [Source: New York Times] The 700-year-old luxury village costs $15,000 per night if rented by ‚Äoenormal clients,‚Äù but according to Mail Online, it is likely that the Obamas are not paying as their ties with Phillips are deep and one could make the argument that he owes them a favor or two after being appointed Ambassador to Italy. The village is incredible and features 22 bedrooms, including a colossal 800 square foot ‚ÄoeMedici‚Äù master bedroom with its own steam room, Jacuzzi, and sauna. It is interesting to note how liberals worldwide love to bash President Donald Trump as an elitist billionaire, while they hardly notice the vacation habits of Barack and Michelle Obama and their minions. Unlike Obama, Trump made his money prior to entering politics. In truth, the Obamas are just getting started in amassing a fortune, as they apparently plan to travel the world giving highly paid speeches and staying in the most choice locations. Imagine all of the healthy school lunches Michelle Obama could buy for poor children using the money spent on these trips or all of the community improvements in inner cities that the Obamas could initiate. Instead, they will continue to enjoy ritzy vacations while decrying the evils of those who actually earned their money, President Donald Trump included. Hypocrisy is such a part of the left-wing, socialist mentality that Obama supporters are unlikely to say a word about these outlandish getaways. Liberals love to complain, and they love to get nice things that are paid for by someone else. It is part of their culture and their mentality, and unfortunately, even though Barack Obama is gone from office, the mindset remains for many of his followers.