Illegal aliens and immigration activists came out for a town hall-style meeting in Southern California on Tuesday night, which was hosted by Rep. Lou Correa (D-Santa Ana). Much to the dismay of Correa and his supporters, though, the illegals weren‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t the only ones to show up for his ‚ÄoeImmigration Workshop.‚Äù In fact, they were horrified to see who was waiting for them inside the event. In an interview with NBC 4, Correa claimed that his meeting was disrupted by ‚ÄoeTrump supporters angry over immigration.‚Äù Tensions quickly escalated between the supporters of President Donald Trump and the advocates of illegal immigration, resulting in the arrest of one ANTIFA protestor, who allegedly physically assaulted one of the Trump supporters. Multiple news accounts referenced ‚Äoeviolence‚Äù but failed to clarify that the only arrest was made for an assault by an ANTIFA protestor against a member of the anti-illegal immigration activist group known as ‚ÄoeWe the People Rising, (WTPR)‚Äù who showed up to peacefully monitor and protest the ‚Äoesubversive‚Äù ‚ÄoeImmigration Workshop and Townhall,‚Äù according to Executive Director of WTPR, Robin Hvidston. [Source: Breitbart] Hvidston said the ‚ÄoeImmigration Workshop‚Äù was scheduled to feature a controversial slide presentation which ‚Äoeinstructs illegal aliens how to respond to immigration authorities in order to avoid arrest and deportation.‚Äù ‚ÄoeTeaching illegal aliens how to avoid detection by ICE at a meeting being held under the seal of a US Congressman is wrong,‚Äù Hvidston said. ‚ÄoeI completely support the right of all parties to exercise their first amendment rights,‚Äù Correa told the Orange County Register. ‚ÄoeHowever, I urge people to act responsibly and refrain from violence.‚Äù He ought to lecture his own supporters, who were the only ones that got violent at Tuesday‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s meeting. This is not the first time we have seen the left resort to violence when faced with a difference of opinion, and it surely will not be the last. It would be much easier and save them quite a bit of jail time if they would simply develop some simple communication skills. Teaching illegals how to evade deportation is tantamount to endorsing criminal activity, and Correa should be ashamed of himself. He may be from one of the most liberal states in the country, but it is not befitting of a U.S. Congressman to advocate for breaking the law. He deserves to lose his seat, just as much as those in the country illegally deserve to be deported.