President Donald Trump took questions from the media on Wednesday surrounding his surprising dismissal of now-former FBI Director James Comey one day prior. Sitting in the Oval Office alongside former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, the president stunned a liberal reporter by revealing the real reason he fired Comey. ‚ÄoeMr. President, why did you fire Director Comey?‚Äù asked an unidentified journalist. ‚ÄoeHe wasn‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t doing a good job. Very simply,‚Äù Trump said. ‚ÄoeHe was not doing a good job.‚Äù The President made the remark while speaking to pool reporters in the Oval Office. He was meeting with former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger after having met earlier in the day with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and Russian Ambassador to the US Sergey Kislyak. Asked if Comey‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s firing affected the meeting with the Russians, Trump replied, ‚Äoenot at all.‚Äù [Source: CNN] ‚ÄoeToday, President Donald J. Trump informed FBI Director James Comey that he has been terminated and removed from office,‚Äù the White House said in a Tuesday statement. ‚ÄoePresident Trump acted based on the clear recommendations of both Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein and Attorney General Jeff Sessions.‚Äù Comey first learned that he had been fired by seeing news reports on television while he was in Los Angeles for a field office inspection and recruitment event. His termination was then read to him over the phone. ‚ÄoeI have received the attached letters from the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General of the United States recommending your dismissal as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,‚Äù Trump wrote to Comey in the termination letter. ‚ÄoeI have accepted their recommendation and you are hereby terminated and removed from office, effective immediately,‚Äù the letter continued. ‚ÄoeWhile I greatly appreciate you informing me, on three separate occasions, that I am not under investigation, I nevertheless concur with the judgment of the Department of Justice that you are not able to effectively lead the Bureau,‚Äù Trump added. ‚ÄoeIt is essential that we find new leadership for the FBI that restores public trust and confidence in its vital law enforcement mission.‚Äù An FBI official told ABC News that Comey was ‚Äoesurprised, really surprised‚Äù and was ‚Äoecaught flat-footed‚Äù by the termination. While the president works swiftly to find his successor, former deputy FBI Director Andrew McCabe will take over in the meantime. Unlike what we saw with former administrations, if you do not do your job effectively, President Donald Trump will not hesitate to let you go, effective immediately. It simply does American taxpayers no good to have dead weight in Washington, D.C. James Comey had proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that he was leading the nation‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s preeminent law enforcement agency in the wrong direction, so Trump rightfully cut him loose. This should serve as a warning to others who having anything besides the country‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s best interests in mind.