Following the successful launch of another missile by North Korea, signifying that the rogue regime‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s nuclear program is progressing much more rapidly than previously thought, President Donald Trump has responded in force. His most recent move has left Kim Jong-un noticeably shaken as the totalitarian dictator comes to terms with the reality that he is sorely ill-equipped to fight a war against the United States. On Friday, North Korea‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s deputy U.N. envoy said that the country will continue to strengthen its nuclear program as a necessary measure to counter U.S. aggression. Just two days later, on Sunday, the country fired another medium-range missile into the sea. U.S. and South Korean officials announced on Sunday that North Korea fired a medium-range missile, in the latest ballistics test for a country speeding up its development of nuclear weapons and missiles. U.S. Pacific Command said it tracked the missile until it landed into the sea. South Korea‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s Office of Joint Chiefs of staff released a statement Sunday afternoon stating that the launch came from an area near Pukchang, in South Phyongan Province, and flew eastward about 310 miles. [Source: Fox News] The US military responded immediately by showing Kim Jong-un that while he may enjoy firing off his rockets in senseless acts of aggression, we are far better prepared with far superior armed forces. According to the US Navy, the USS Ronald Reagan has been put out to sea to join the USS Carl Vinson in the Korean Peninsula. ‚ÄoeComing out of a long in-port maintenance period we have to ensure that Ronald Reagan and the remainder of the strike group are integrated properly as we move forward,‚Äù said Rear Admiral Charles Williams in a press release. The 1,092-foot Reagan recently began running training exercises just off the coast of Japan and is intended to serve as a replacement to the Vinson once its deployment expires. A Nimitz-class carrier, the formidable ship has a crew of 4,539 and is equipped with roughly 60 aircraft. It was commissioned in 2003 and cost approximately $8.5 billion. North Korea has maintained the promise that they will continue with their nuclear program as long as the U.S. maintains a ‚Äoehostile‚Äù stance with the nation. As recently as Friday, the North‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s UN envoy vowed that the country would proceed with testing despite global pleas to desist. The U.S. is hopeful that with the help of China and Russia, North Korea can be convinced to denuclearize. South Korea has also expressed interest in reopening the line of communication between the two countries for improved global relations as well. [Source: Young Conservatives] North Korea may be testing weapons of mass destruction, but the nation is simply not prepared to fight a war, especially against the United States and her allies. At this point, Kim Jong-un is playing with fire, and he is going to get burned before long.