Amid increasing tensions between the United States and Germany, President Donald Trump has fired back at German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who said over the weekend that Germany and the European Union can no longer rely on the United States. Her comments were an obvious attack on Trump, but the president found the perfect way to embarrass her after she made the snide remarks. Merkel, who is currently campaigning for the September federal election, said at an election rally on Sunday in Munich, ‚ÄoeThe times in which we could completely depend on others are, to a certain extent, over. I‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>ve experienced that in the last few days. We Europeans truly have to take our fate into our own hands.‚Äù If she meant that the handouts are over now that Trump is in power, she was damn right. According to CNBC, she was referring to the NATO summit in Brussels last week, where Trump did not mince words as he called out other NATO members who are not contributing enough to the defense alliance, creating an unfair burden on American taxpayers. ‚ÄoeOver the last eight years, the United States spent more on defense than all NATO countries combined,‚Äù Trump said as foreign leaders arrived in Brussels on Thursday. ‚ÄoeIf all NATO members had spent just 2 percent of GDP on defense last year, we would have had another $119 billion for our collective defense,‚Äù he continued. ‚ÄoeWe should recognize that with these chronic underpayments and growing threats, even 2 percent of GDP is insufficient to close the gaps in modernizing, readiness and the size of forces,‚Äù added the president. ‚ÄoeWe have to make up for the many years lost.‚Äù Then, on Tuesday, Trump tweeted that Germany‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s low contributions to NATO are ‚Äoevery bad‚Äù for the United States. We have a MASSIVE trade deficit with Germany, plus they pay FAR LESS than they should on NATO & military. Very bad for U.S. This will change ‚Ä" Donald J. Trump () May 30, 2017 Indeed, Germany could easily afford to contribute more towards NATO, but they have been able to get away without doing so over the years former President Barack Obama was in office. Coincidentally, Angela Merkel was known to be Obama‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s closest friend out of all other foreign leaders; to be sure, he was never going to put his foot down and demand Germany pay their fair share. Data released last February by the German Federal Statistics Office showed that Germany‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s trade surplus rose to 252.9 billion euros ($270.05 billion) in 2016, surpassing the previous high of 244.3 billion euros in 2015.If it were a single trade partner, Germany would be the fifth largest in total trade flows with the U.S. But it runs the third largest trade surplus, after China and Japan. Meanwhile, contributions to the defense alliance NATO has emerged as another problem between Berlin and Washington. Trump has repeatedly asked NATO allies to step up their contributions. At the moment, only 5 of the 28 members fulfill the target of paying at least 2 percent of their gross domestic product on defense. According to NATO data, Germany is currently spending 1.2 percent of its GDP on NATO. The U.S. spends 3.6 percent. [Source: Yahoo! Finance] Thankfully, the days of Angela Merkel taking advantage of the United States are now over. At a time when she is seeking reelection, the last thing she needs is Trump embarrassing her on Twitter. She‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s already earned herself a reputation as one of the weakest leaders in Europe after having taken in throngs of un-vetted Muslim migrants to the peril of her own people. Now, she‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s become a pathetic punching bag for Trump, too.