The liberal Hollywood elitists just never learn. Their views are so contradictory to the way the rest of America feels, and they are so preoccupied with themselves that their ability to relate to average Joes is nearly nonexistent. This was most recently proven when a group of liberal actors staged an anti-Trump play and were met with a brutal reality check only weeks later. An Off-Broadway play which was harshly critical of President Donald Trump has been forced to close early following dismal ticket sales. Even though the play opened in liberal New York City, it struggled to build an audience. Building the Wall, written by Tony Award-winning playwright Robert Schenkkan, is closing a month early, the play‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s producer Jeffrey Richards told the New York Times. Schenkkan took to Twitter Friday to announce the play‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s ‚Äoefinal performances this weekend,‚Äù ahead of its original July 9 end date. [Source: Breitbart] When you hear the premise for the show, you‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>ll instantly understand why no one in their right mind would purchase a seat, as it sounds like little more than a far-fetched tale aimed at unfairly slandering President Trump, who has done an excellent job as president thus far. According to the Times, the political thriller follows a history professor named Gloria (Tamara Tunie) who interviews a former security officer named Rick (James Badge Gale). Set in 2019, the storyline sees President Donald Trump removed from office after a terrorist attack in Times Square forces him to declare Martial Law, placing Muslims and Mexicans in containment camps, which eventually turn into killing chambers. Final performances this weekend for off-Bway at New ! Come see and burn it up! ‚Ä" ROBERT SCHENKKAN () June 2, 2017 ‚ÄoeOur author built a powerful play; however, during this Tony Awards season and during a season which has not been kind to straight plays, we were unable to build an audience,‚Äù said Richards. ‚ÄoeIt is especially difficult to do so when you are Off Broadway.‚Äù Schenkkan, who has been openly critical of Trump, wrote the 90-minute play in just one week in what he described as a ‚Äoewhite-hot fury‚Äù after the election. ‚ÄoeWe no longer live in a world that is business as usual ‚Ä" Trump has made that very clear ‚Ä" and if theater is going to remain relevant, we must become faster to respond,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄoeWe cannot hope to be useful if we can‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t respond until 18 months after the fact.‚Äù Perhaps Schenkkan will put a little more time into his next piece of work before releasing it to the public, as one particularly harsh review described ‚ÄoeBuilding the Wall‚Äù as a ‚Äoehastily‚Äù written play which ‚Äoehobbles‚Äù along, crippled by ‚Äoefamiliar ideas‚Äù like a prison interview. Yikes! As public support for President Trump continues to grow, the left would do well to put a lid on their attacks against him, especially when it comes to entertainment. Plays are intended to be an escape from everyday life and a form of enjoyment for the viewer. Clearly, there was nothing even remotely enjoyable about sitting through a showing of ‚ÄoeBuilding the Wall,‚Äù which is why no one would buy tickets.