Lawmakers in Alabama are sick and tired of seeing liberals destroy American history with the tearing down of Civil War Monuments and the renaming of schools in their attempt to ‚Äoesanitize history.‚Äù Now, with a bold new move, the men and women of the Alabama state legislature have dealt an unprecedented death blow to political correctness that makes them the envy of conservatives nationwide. According to Fox News, Alabama lawmakers took a stand against the rising trend of the left to ‚Äoesanitize history‚Äù on Friday, May 19th, 2017. A comprehensive list of protections was approved by lawmakers to prevent liberal race-baiters from destroying Confederate monuments and renaming significant landmarks or schools. The measure ‚Äoewould prohibit the relocation, removal, alteration, renaming, or other disturbance of any architecturally significant building, memorial building, memorial street, or monument that has stood on public property for 40 or more years,‚Äù it states. In addition, a new state commission would have control over changes to names or memorials installed between 20 and 40 years ago. African-American lawmakers in Alabama rigorously fought the new legislation from the very beginning, with many of them arguing that the new legislation solidifies a shameful legacy of slavery. ‚ÄoeYou say we are protecting history. We are not protecting history. We are protecting monuments that represent oppression to a large part of the people in the state of Alabama,‚Äù said Sen. Hank Sanders, according to Daily News. Nothing could be further from the truth. If anything, future generations need to be educated and mindful of our country‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s history, not brainwashed. The left wants to revise history and erase parts of history with which they don‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t agree. They need to see the danger in a nation who doesn‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t study history, for they are doomed to repeat it. Proponents of the measure argued that it should protect all kinds of history and not just Confederate symbols. Rightfully so, Sen. Gerald Allen, who sponsored the bill, criticized the left for a ‚Äoewave of political correctness‚Äù that is responsible for the destruction of important monuments to historical individuals he said were important despite their personal flaws The Governor of Alabama, Kay Ivey, added an important amendment to the measure which was approved by lawmakers to ensure that schools could change their locations and conduct renovations but not change their names. At a time when several Southern states are tearing down Confederate monuments and renaming schools or landmarks, Alabama has truly taken the appropriate stand to fight the disease of political correctness. American children need to study our history as it happened, not as the left would have liked it to happen. The death of political correctness in Alabama is a welcomed one. Other states should follow their example and pass laws to preserve our culture and the memorials to those who sacrificed life and property on either side of a conflict.