Motorcyclists from across the nation flooded Washington, D.C., for the annual Memorial Day weekend tradition known as Rolling Thunder. The ride started decades ago with the ‚Äoenever forget‚Äù mantra after Vietnam veterans returned home to protesters who jeered them in the streets. Veterans getting ready to roll were shocked when President Donald Trump‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s right-hand man showed up donning leathers, and you‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>ll love what happened next. This year marks the 30th anniversary of the demonstration meant ‚Äoeto educate, facilitate, and never forget service members that were abandoned after the Vietnam War.‚Äù It‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s a yearly display of patriotism, freedom, and respect for the men and woman who defend our country. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson showed up, ready to roll, and he was an instant hit with the veterans and their families who were shocked to see him there. ‚ÄoeO.K., this is just buckets of all-American awesome,‚Äù the post on Conservative Treehouse stated. ‚ÄoeSecretary of State Rex Tillerson rides with Rolling Thunder in Washington, D.C. to celebrate Memorial Day and salute our armed forces.‚Äù Here's Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, at Rolling Thunder 2017! üá∫üá∏ ‚Ä" Democrats for Trump () May 29, 2017 ‚ÄoeWe knew T-Rex was awesome, but who knew T-Rex was Rolling Thunder level awesome?‚Äù said the post, which included the 2-minute video of Tillerson in the staging area at the Pentagon. The Diplomatic Security Service posted a photo on its Facebook page, explaining its role in the event. ‚ÄoeDSS special agents provided security for Secretary Tillerson today at #RollingThunder2017 in Washington, D.C. The Secretary and two of the special agents assigned to his DSS Protective Detail rode motorcycles in the event,‚Äù reported DSS‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s Facebook page. No one ever in the Obama administration showed up for ‚ÄoeRolling Thunder,‚Äù and most Americans aren‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>t surprised by that, either. I wanna go can I go hey guys hey hey can I go come on guys let me go was. I'm gonna tell. Come let me go with you. ‚Ä" Gary D. () May 29, 2017 It just goes to show who are the real patriots and who are the elitists. No wonder the man affectionately called ‚ÄoeT-Rex‚Äù by conservative media wanted to join in, Tillerson is a grade ‚ÄoeA‚Äù patriot as his early years attest to. ‚ÄoeRex Wayne Tillerson was born on March 23, 1952, in Wichita Falls, Texas. From his early years, the Boy Scouts were an important part of his life; his parents, Bob and Patty, had met at a Boy Scout camp as teenagers, and Bob went on to work for the organization. Tillerson became one of its devoted young members, rising to the rank of Eagle Scout at age 13,‚Äù reports Biography.com. Tillerson went to the University of Texas and worked his way up at Exxon, starting in the oil fields. He rose to prominence for his steadfastness and coolness while under fire. Never a politician, it was Condelessa Rice who had been a fan and recommended him for Secretary of State to President Donald Trump. Tillerson has proven he is worth his weight in gold for our country, and this is just one more reason that patriotic Americans are so pleased that he is one of our president‚Ä<sup>TM</sup>s right-hand men.